Compare SPELL vs counts correlation (#48)
greenelab/core-accessory-interactome: 2_correlation_analysis/spell_vs_counts_experiment/README.md

# Compare SPELL vs counts correlation

There are two possible correlation matrices we can use for our analysis:

> 1. Correlation of the MR counts expression matrix
> 2. Correlation of the MR counts that have been processed using SPELL

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Correlation of the median-ratio counts expression matrix
2. Correlation of the median-ratio counts that have been processed using SPELL
```
I'd suggest spelling this out here, in case people haven't read your other scripts and documentation.

> 2. Correlation of the MR counts that have been processed using SPELL

Reviewer: Also, could you add a link to a paper or something describing SPELL here?

The correlation of the counts matrix relates how similar a pair of genes are based on their expression profiles - **relates genes over samples**.
High correlation means that a pair of genes have a similar expression profiles - i.e. similar levels of expression across samples/contexts, so genes both have low expression in the same samples and high expression in the same samples.
* Pro: Easy to interpret
* Con: Many gene pairs found to have a high correlation because many genes are related to the same pathway have the similar expression profiles. This is consistent with [Myers et al.](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1186/1471-2164-7-187), who found that there can be an over-representation of genes associated with the same pathway (i.e. a large fraction of gene pairs represent ribosomal relationships). This very prominent signal makes it difficult to detect other signals. Figure 1C demonstrates that a large fraction of gene pairs are ribosomal relationships - in the top 0.1% most co-expressed genes, 99% belong to the ribosome pathway. Furthermore, protein function prediction based on co-expression drop dramatically after removing the ribisome pathway (Figure 1A, B).

> To try to remove this very dominant global signal in the data. Here we are applying dimensionality reduction techniques in addition to scaling the data using a method called SPELL.

Reviewer: This was sort of the same idea behind using ADAGE to construct networks in the generic-expression project, right? To remove the strong operon signal that tends to dominate co-expression networks?

I guess maybe you could do something similar here, but it seems like SPELL is getting at the same idea so it's probably fine.

Author: Yes that is the same idea here you're right. ADAGE would be another way to have approached this. I think SPELL was a simple first step especially for our downstream interpretations

The correlation of the SPELL matrix relates genes based on the gene coefficient matrix - **relate genes over their contribution to singular vectors (linear combination of genes - linear relationship between genes)**.
High correlation means that a pair of genes contributes similarly to a singular vector, which are the axes pointing in the direction of the spread of the data and capture how genes are related to each other
* Pro: Gene contributions are more balanced so that redundant signals (i.e. many genes from the same pathway - genes that vary together) are represented by a few SVs as opposed to many samples. More balanced also means that more subtle signals can be amplified (i.e. genes related by a smaller pathway are also captured by a few SVs)
* Con: Can amplify noise - i.e. an SV that corresponds to some technical source of variability now has a similar weight to other real signals

> For more information comparing using counts vs SPELL-processing see: https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/18E0boNODJaxP-YYNIlccrh0kASbc7bapQBMovOX62jw/edit#slide=id.gf9d09c6be6_0_0

Reviewer: These Google slides seem to have restricted access (I can't see them).
